---
layout: post
title: Language ideology on AlJazera: *Taḥt al-mijhar---Luġat aḍ-ḍād*
permalink: /taht-al-mihjar-lugat-ad-dad/
language: English
tags:
- Arabic
---

[//]: # (sed timestamps to links)
[//]: # (%s/\v(\d\d):(\d\d)/\[\(\1:\2\)\]\(https:\/\/www\.youtube\.com\/watch\?v=PVqBOrzxEwc&t=#\1m#\2s\)/g)

# Language ideology on Al&nbsp;Jazera: *Taḥt al-mihjaar - Luġat aḍ-ḍād*
December 4, 2014, AlJazeera showed the documentary [*Lisān aḍ-ḍād yajmiʿunā*](http://www.aljazeera.net/programs/infocus/2013/12/4/لسان-الضاد-يجمعنا) [The language of *ḍād* unites us] as part of the *Taḥt al-mijhar* series of documentaries produced in-house by AlJazeera. The program is interesting in that it so clearly illustrate the Arabic language ideology in action, covering virtually all its aspects, being in effect and inventory of commonly held concerns about the current state of Arabic. This post consists a fairly thorough list of the content of the views presented in this documentary, illustrated with quotes. I do not claim to make any new observation about Arabic language ideology, or about standard language ideology at large.

Many of these concerns aired in the program, though not all, are ill founded or based on highly dubious ideas about what languages are, how they change, and what "good" language is. These views are presented by speakers appearing either as experts---academic scholars, teachers, and other intellectuals---or by ''ordinary people'' sharing their experiences with Arabic. The role of these ordinary people is largely to confess to the shortcomings described by the experts such speaking English with their children or using the dialect where they shouldn't.

It seams a fair assumption that the views presented in the program are the views of AlJazeera. The program is produced by the network and no opposing views critical to the dominant discourse are aired. Even statements that are highly dubious, uttered from scholars of language are left uncommented. One example is that the dialects have no grammar or that a speaker who mixes Arabic with other languages us using a ''disformed'' (*mušawwah*) language and is infect himself disformed.

It has been very tempting when writing this post to comment on statements such as that above. I have tried not to, however, and only relate and summarize what is stated in the documentary, and let the statements speak for themselves. Instead I have added some comments at the end of this post. Suffice it to say that it is interesting to note how neatly the ideas propagated in the program fits with descriptions of the standard language ideology in English speaking countries.[^1] The difference in the Arabic speaking world is that even very extreme expressions of this ideology are completely mainstream, of which the documentary summarized here is an example.   


In the following, time references to the documentary are given in parenthesis. These are hyperlinked to the appropriate section of the documentary on AlJazeera's channel on YouTube. The content as presented here largely follows the structure of the program. A complete transcript of the program, produced and published by AlJazeera, can be found [here](http://www.aljazeera.net/File/Get/4223314e-6f10-4d77-b485-cdea4305c3ac).


## The sorry state of Arabic
The documentary presents a sad and pessimistic picture of the state of Arabic, underlined throughout the program with gloomy music. Arabic is described as a language struggling for survival, surrounded by threats from all sides. Some of these threats are, allegedly, the  agenda of foreign powers to marginalize the Arabic language. Other and more serious dangers originate in moral flaws of the Arabs themselves. The underlining assumption throughout the documentary is that Arabic is under severe, and possibly an existential threat.

The documentary is introduced with lines of texts giving facts illustrating the sorry state of the Arabic language set in contrast to its status as a global language (01:32):

>    - There are 22 universities in the AUE, only in one is Arabic taught.
>    - 65% of Jordanian homepages use either dialectal Arabic or Arabizi .
>    - Ca. 40% of shop signs in  Cairo are in English.

These are then contrasted with the role of Arabic as an international language:

>    - More than 300 milion persons speak Arabic.
>    - Arabic is an official language in 26 countries.

The concerns with discussed in the program gravitates around two main themes: the threat of foreign languages, primarily English, and the threat of the dialects. It is tempting to describe these as a threat from within (dialects) and a threat from without (foreign languages). But the encroachment of English on Arabic is largely explained by deficiencies within Arabic speaking community; inability to coin new terms, the policy of adopting foreign languages in education, etc.

## Foreign languages 
The first major threat to Arabic and one of the causes of its weakness in is the dominance of English, primarily in connection with modern technology (02:50, 07:59). New technologies and devices come with their English names and terminologies which are taken up by Arabic speakers 

### Technology and terminology
Severe critique is levels against the language academies for their failure to adapt Arabic to new technology. Their coining of new words come too late, after a loan word for the new phenomena has been firmly established, and their new coinage is thus ignored (09:25). This is contrasted against the Golden Era of the Abbasid Empire when the Arabic language was in the front lines of science. The strength of this era is said to be in that foreign sciences were translated into Arabic (11:12) and taught and studied in Arabic rather than in their original languages (11:50).

The problem, it is said, lies not in the Arabic language itself. The Arabic language can express everything related to all modern technologies:

> العيب مش كله على اللغة. العيب على المتحدثين باللغة.

> The fault lies not with the language. The fault lies with the speakers of the language (09:15).

The Arab countries are underdeveloped, especially in the sciences, and are therefore unable to see to and use their language (08:20).

The marginalization of Arabic through the introduction of English comes also through the adaption of its alphabet. The Latin alphabet is often used to write Arabic in instant messages on mobile phones, in the so called "Arabizi" (17:20). Although it started as a necessity---in the first mobile phones there were no Arabic characters---its consequences are portrayed as nothing short of catastrophic. Dr. al-Xatīb of University of Petra explains that the Arabic language has been misshapen (*al-luga al-ʿarabiyya šuwwihat*) by the use of foreign words and a foreign form of writing. This has wide reaching moral implications: 

> فبالتالي لا بد أن يكون الأنسان الذي أمامك أيضا مشوه. لا بد أن يكون مشوه. فلا هو قادر أن يتكلم العربية ولا هو قادر أن يتقن اللغة الإندليزية.

> This means that the person in front of you must also be misshapen. He is by necessity misshapen. Because he is not able to speak [proper] Arabic and he does not master the English language.  

In texting on mobile phones, not only are messages written in the dialects (which is bad enough, see below), but also with Latin characters --- "Catastrophy! (*Kāriṯa!*) This is what the enemy has been waiting for" (18:20). It is in fact claimed that the encroachment of foreign languages, and also the Arabic dialects, on the written domain traditionally reserved for Standard Arabic is part of a policy of Arab governments to ensure the dominance of the West by dividing the Arab world (16:25). Modern communication technologies is one tool at their disposal to reach this aim. Dr. Aḥmad al-Xaṭīb explains that in Arabic, text message on the mobile phone can only be 70 characters long but twice as long in other languages and that the system was designed this way in order to encourage Arabs to use languages other than Arabic (16:50).


### Education
The second way English is encroaching on Arabic is in its growing role in education, shaping the cultural identity of Arab youth. This begins in primary education where Arabic is taught as a dry, boring, and lifeless language with old textual material to which children cannot relate. Often teachers are not allowed to use other material since the curriculum is strictly regulated. This is put in contrast with English teaching in which a more modern pedagogy and more engaging teaching materials are used (05:07).

Arabs, especially in the upper strata of society, are more keen on having their children learn English or some other foreign language than they are to teach them Arabic (21:20). This idea of the importance of foreign languages is however exaggerated and originates from the feeling of inferiority toward the West (33:50). A number of Arab teenagers who receive their education in English and use it in their everyday lives are interviewed and their parents explain their choice to send their children to a "language school" (20:50, 27:55).  The experts' comments on the phenomenon are damning. The danger lies in that this foreign language takes control of the thought of Arabs who speak it in a colonization of the mind:

> اللغة هي التي تحدد الصورة الذهنية والصورة الذهنية هي التي ْْتبني طريقة التفكير. كونٌ. اللغة تباعه استُعرت فهو غدى إيسان مستعمرة. دماغه أُحتُل.

> The language is what defines the mental image, and the mental image is what defines the structure of thought. When his language is colonized then he is a colonized human being. His brain is under occupation (32:10). 

This creates loyalties amongst Arabs to a foreign culture (30:00) and they loose their identity (30:40). They loose their "arabness" (*ʿurūba*, 33:00). Language schools tend to focus more on the history and literature of foreign countries and less on that of Arabic (29:30) and students learn to think in concepts of that foreign culture. This is exemplified with the portrayal of the struggle of the Palestinians. One of the experts states that under the entry "Palestine" in the Oxford Dictionary it says "the original land of Jews". Accordingly:  

> بعلى الدارس باللغة اإنجليزية أن تأدخذ لهذا المفهوم

> He whose studies are in English will receive this concept (31:40).

Another commentator explains that the person whose language and concepts are from the West talk only about Palestine as if the issue was only the wall and not decades of oppression and occupation (32:30).

The Arabic situation is compared with the situation of Hebrew of Israel, a language revived and adapted to modern society and around which Israelis have built their national identity. Israel have succeeded where the Arab nations have failed (37:45). Similarly, other countries such as South Korea and Japan faced a similar situation as the Arab countries in facing modernity. They became successful countries by sticking with and developing their own languages (39:30).

[//]: # ((39:10) Araberna är den enda nationen i världen där man överger sitt eget språk när man lär sig ett nytt.)

Syria, where the science are taught in Arabic in universities, is held up as an example of how this is possible also in modern times, despite the global dominance of English in the global scientific community (12:20).


## The vernaculars
The other main threat to Arabic is the dialects (*al-ʿāmmiyyāt*). While it is stated that the dialects do have a place in Arab societies as a means of everyday communication (*wasīla tadāwuliyya*, 14:25), the threat lies in its encroaching on domains that were previously reserved for Standard Arabic (*fuṣḥā*, 15:07). One such domain is children's television programs. It used to be the case that these were dubbed in Standard Arabic, and this served to make this variety attractive to children. The program *Iftaḥ yā simsim* was especially important in this regard (12:30). Today, however, children's programs are usually dubbed in the dialect (13:40).

It not made clear why the Arabic dialects constitute such a danger, it is simply taken for granted that it is an inferior, incomplete, and faulty language. Dr al-Xaṭīb explains:

> Wherein lies the danger? Wherein lies the danger? The danger lies in that we put the dialect in the place of Standard Arabic, in the sciences, in culture, in writing about the heritage. And the dialects have no foundation. A house, a home, anything, if it does not have pillars on which to rest, then what is it? It has no stability (*qiāma*).   

> أين الخطر؟ أين الخطر؟ الخطر أن نضع العامية موضع الفصحى, في العلم وفي الفن في كتابة التراث. اللحجات لا قواعدة لها. البيت, المنزل, أي شيء, أي مؤسسة, إذا لم تكن لها أعمدة تكوم عليعا فعلى أي شيء تكوم. لا قيامة لها. اللحجات على هذه الصورة.

Indeed, it is simply stated, without explanation, that "the dialects have no future" (*al-ʿāmiyya laysa lahā mustaqbal*, 15:00). 

The growing use of the dialects, again, are said to be connected to Western polices of conquer and divide. The orientalists started their call for the use of the dialects when they noticed the revival of the Arabic language and culture in the second half of the 19th century (20:15).

## Conclusion
The potentially catastrophic consequences of this conspiracy are more poignantly formulated at the end of the documentary. One commentator states that the danger that the Arabic language is facing currently is that the Arabs have lost their pride in the language (42:50). The Arabic language, it is in fact facing an immediate and acute threat of being extinct. Not only the language is at stake. People who are under occupation (the assumption being that all Arabic countries are occupied) face the possibility of ceasing to exist: 

> أن تتحدث بلغة المحتل هو أن تتخلى عن وجودك، هو أن تتخلى عن هويتك، وأن تتخلى عن كينونتك. يعني هذه قضية معروفة. ففي الاحتلالات في دنيةإما أن تتمسك في لغتك فتضمن وجودك وإما أن تتنازل عن لغتك فتنتهي.

> To speak the language of the occupier is to let go of your presence, it is to let go of your identity, and to let go of your existence. This is a known fact. You either hold on to your language and ensure your identity, or you let go of your language and cease to exist (42:00).  


The Arabic language is, it is claimed, about to go extinct (43:15). This is, it is said, what happened in Iraq when the American invasion force stole and exported the material cultural and intellectual heritage of libraries and museums. The same thing is now happening with the abstract heritage of language:
 
> نسيان اللغة معناها نيسيان التتاريخ معناها نسيان التراث. وهذا أمر تعمل عليه الدول الأجنبية ليلا نهارا, كيف تمحوا ذاكرتنا القديمة من أجل إلحاقنا لغربها الاقتصاضي المستفل لثرواتنا ولطاقاتنا.

> Forgetting the language means forgetting history, it means forgetting the heritage. And foreign countries are working towards this aim day and night, how they can erase our memory in order to pursue their own economic interests, exploiting our wealth and our energy (43:50).   

## Some comments
I will keep my own comments on this very brief. One of the most---if not the most---influential Arabic news outlet is in this documentary asserting the following:

- The adoption of loanwords is a threat to the language.

- The mixing of languages is moral deprivation.

- People use one of the dialect for writing, for example in text messages (i.e. virtually all Arabs with a mobile phone) are morally deprived individuals. 

- The Arabic dialects have no grammar.

- Arabic, a language spoken by 250&nbsp;000 people and one of the official language of 26 countries and one of the official language of the UN is facing extinction.

- Arabs who use languages other than Arabic in their daily lives are traitors.

[^1]: E.g.  
Milroy, J. & Milroy, L., 1991. *Authority in Language: investigating language prescription and standardisation,* London: Routledge.  
Bailey, R.W., 1991. *Images of English: a Cultural History of the Language,* Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.  
Curzan, A., 2014. *Fixing English: prescriptivism and language history,* New York: Cambridge University Press.
