---
layout: post
title: Language idelogy on Al&nbsp;Jazera: *Taṭ al-mahjar - Luġat aḍ-ḍād*
permalink: /typographyofaynandhamza/
language: en
tags:
- typography
- transcription
- LaTeX
---


# Language idelogy on Al&nbsp;Jazera: *Taḥt al-mahjar - Luġat aḍ-ḍād*

December 4 2014 Al~Jazeera showed the documentary [*Lisān aḍ-ḍād yajmiʿunā*](http://www.aljazeera.net/programs/infocus/2013/12/4/لسان-الضاد-يجمعنا) [The language of ḍād unites us] as part of the *Taḥt al-mahjar* series of documentaries produced inhouse by Al~Jazeera. The program is interesting in that it so clearly illustrate the Arabic language ideology in action, covering virtually all its aspects, being in effect and inventory of commonly held concerns about the current state of Arabic. I do not claim to make any new observation about Arabic language ideology, or about standard language ideology at large, only to offer an empirical example of how such ideologies are expressed in practice.

The documentary presents a gloomy and sad picture of the state of Arabic as a language that is surrounded and threatened both of outside and inside forces, some of which have, allegedly, an direct agenda to marginalize the Arabic language. Many of these concerns, although not all, are ill founded or based on highly dubious ideas about what languages are, how they change, and what "good" language is.

This post post consists a fairly thorough list of the content of the views presented in this documentary, illustrated with quotes. The list presents the material in the order it is dealt with in the documentary with sectioning added here. Time references to the documentary are given in parenthesis. These are hyperlinked to the appropriate section of the documentary on YouTube.

The views are presented by speakers appearing either as experts---academic scholars, teachers, and other intellectuals---or as ``ordinary people'' sharing their experiences with Arabic. These views are taken to be the views of Al~Jazeera. It is produced by the channel and no opposing views critical to the dominant discourse are heard. Even statements that are highly dubious, uttered from scholars of languge---for example that the dialects have no grammar or that a speaker who mixes Arabic with other languages is himself ``misshapen'' (*mušawwah*)---are left uncommented.

## The sorry state of Arabic
The documentary is introduced with lines of texts giving facts illustrating the sorry state of the Arabic language set in contrast to its status as a global language (01:32): 

>    - There are 22 universities in the AUE, only in one is Arabic taught.
>    - 65% of Jordanian homepages use either dialectal Arabic or Arabizi .
>    - Ca. 40% of shop signs in  Cairo are in English.
>    - More than 300 milion persons speak Arabic.
>    - Arabic is an official language in 26 countries.

The domination of English in modern globalization and technology is said to be a major reason for the weakness and marginalization of Arabic (02:50). 
> &rlm;فبالتالي هذا كله تسحب من رصيدك انت كلغة أم.
- Dr. Aḥmad al-Xaṭīb, after establishing the fact of the weakness (&rlm;ضعف&rlm;) of Arabic, lists several more reasons for this weakness (04:15):
    - other foreign languages
    - the dialects
    - media
    - new technology
    - the globalized economy
    - the way children are raised

Another problem is the experience of school children of Arabic as a dry, boring, and lifeless language. It is taught through old textual material, often poetry, to which children cannot relate. Often teachers are not allowed use other material since the curriculum is strictly regulated. This is put in contrast with English teaching in which a more modern pedagogy and more engaging teaching materials are used (05:07).

A recurring theme in the documentary is the separation from the Arabic language from its speakers. This makes it possible lay the blame of the weakness of Arabic on the speakers. This is first done in a connection with the ability of Arabic to adapt to modern society and technology (07:59). The Arabic language, it is said, can express everything related to all modern technologies. The problem is not in the language but in the fact that the Arabs are underdeveloped, especially in the sciences (08:20). Thus:

> The fault lies not with the language. The fault lies with the speakers of the language.

> العيب مش كله على اللغة. العيب على المتحدثين باللغة (09:15).

Severe critique is levels against the language academies in this regard. Their coining of new words come to late, long after a loan word for the new phenomena has been firmly established, and their new coinage is thus ignored (09:25).

The current state of Arabic is contrasted against the Golden Era of the Abbasid Empire, when Arabic was a major scientific language. **Labov golden era**. The strength of this era is said to be in that foreign sciences were translated into Arabic (11:12) and taught in Arabic rather than being taught and studied in their original languages (11:50). Syria is held up as an example of how this can be done also in modern times (12:20).

## Dialekter
The other main threat to Arabic is the dialects. While it is state that the dialects do have a place in Arab societies as a means of everyday communication (*wasīla tadāwuliyya*) (14:25), its threat lies in encroaching domains that were previously reserved for Standard Arabic (15:07). One such domain are children's television programs. It used to be the case that these were dubbed in Standard Arabic, and this served to make Standard Arabic attractive to children. The program *Iftaḥ yā simsim* was especially important in this regard (12:30). Today, however, children's programs are dubbed in the dialect (13:40).

(14:00)
- (14:25) Dr. Aḥmad al-Xaṭīb: Dialekten är *wasīla tadāwuliyya* som vi använder för att prata med varandra med. 

> Where is the danger? Where is the danger? The danger is that we put the dialect in the place of Standard Arabic, in the sciences, in culture, in writing about the heritage. And the dialects have no foundation. A house, a home, anything, if it does not have pillars on to rest upon, then what is it? It has no position (*qiāama*). Like this are the dialects.   

> أين الخطر؟ أين الخطر؟ الخطر أن نضع العامية موضع الفصحى, في العلم وفي الفن في كتابة التراث. اللحجات لا قواعدة لها. البيت, المنزل, أي شيء, أي مؤسسة, إذا لم تكن لها أعمدة تكوم عليعا فعلى أي شيء تكوم. لا قيامة لها. اللحجات على هذه الصورة.

Why the dialects do not have any foundation is not expanded upon, but it is made clear that the dialects have no future (*al-ʿāmiyya laysa lahā mustaqbal*) (Dr. Samir Kibrīt, 15:00). 

## Conspiracy
What is more, the encroachment of the dialects on domains transitionally reserved for Standard Arabic is said to be part of a policy of Arab governments to ensure the dominance of the West and to divide the Arab world (16:25). One in which they have achieved this is through modern communication technologies. First, this pushes people away from Arabic. Dr. Aḥmad al-Xaṭīb explains that in Arabic, text message on the mobile phone can only be 70 letters long but twice as long in other languages. The system was designed this way in order to encourage people to use languages other than Arabic (16:50). 

Second, the dominance lead to the creations of Arabizi, the use of Latin characters to write Arabic (17:20). Although it started as a necessity, its consequences are portrayed as nothing short of catastrophic. al-Xatībī explaines that the Arabic language has been misshapen (*al-luga al-ʿarabiyya šuwwihat*) by the use of foreign words and a foreign form of writing. According to him, this has misshapen language has widereaching moral implications: 

    > This means that the person in front of you must also be misshapen. He is by necessity misshapen. Because he is not able to speak [proper] Arabic and he does not master the English language.  
    > فبالتالي لا بد أن يكون الأنسان الذي أمامك أيضا مشوه. لا بد أن يكون مشوه. فلا هو قادر أن يتكلم العربية ولا هو قادر أن يتقن اللغة الإندليزية.
    
X agrees: messages written not only in the dialects, but also with Latin characters --- Catastrophy! (*Kāriṯa!*). ''This is what the enemy has been waiting for.'' (*xxx xxx*) (18:20) Indeed, the orentalists have for a long tome propagated for using the Latin script to write Arabic (19:00), and they have propagated the use of the dialects since they noticed the revival of the Aravic language and culture in the second half of the 19th century  (Aḥmad al-Xaṭīb, 20:15).


### Engelseka
- (21:20) Högutbildade människor är mer intresserade av att lära sina barn arabiska \n engelska.
- (20:40) Intervju med förälder som skickar sina barn till en engelsk skola.
- (20:00) Folk talar om engelskspråkiga skolor mot bakgrund av sorglig musik.
- (20:30) Dominerar högre utbildning.
- (27:00) Tonåringar som presenterar sig och talar om sig själva på engelska.
- (27:55) Mamma i Dubay beklagar sig över att hon inte har uppmuntrat sin son att prata arabisk.
- (29:50) Föräldrar pratar med sina barn på engelska och är stolta över att de pratar engelska.
- (29:30) Skolor som undervisar på engelska lägger också större vikt vid västernländsk historia och litteratur.
- (30:00) Deras lojalitet är inte vid den arabiska kulturen och nationen utan vid en främmnade, utländsk kultur.
- (30:40) Araber som pratar engelska förlorar sin identitet.
- (30:20) "Språket är kulturens behållare". Exempel med Oxford Dictionary: Palestine = "the origanl land of jews." 

> بعلى الدارس باللغة اإنجليزية أن تأدخذ لهذا المفهوم

> He whose studies are in English will receive this concept.

- (32:10)
> اللغة هي التي تحدد الصورة الذهنية والصورة الذهنية هي التي ْْتبني XXX التفكير. كونٌ. اللغة تباعه استُعرت فهو غدى إيسان مستعمرة. دماغه أُحتُل.

> The language is what defines the mental image and the mental image XXX thaught. His language has been colonized, and therefore he is a colonized human being.

- (32:30) Exempel med Palestina. Den som tar sitt språk från väst pratar om murern, som om det bara handlade om muren, medan det egentligen handlar förtryck och ockupation. 

- (33:00) Den som får sin kultur och sin bildning från ett annat språk kommer att bygga sin identitet utifrån den kulturen. Han kommer att förlora sin *ʿurūba*.

- (33:30) Klassskillnad mellan dem som går i språkskola och dem som går i vanlig offentlig skola. Dessa känner sig underlägsna.
- (33:50) Känslan av vikten av att kunna ett främmande språk är överdriven. Kommer ur arabernas känsla av underlägsenhet mot Väst.

- (34:20) Känsla av att vara besegrad gör att araber söker ta till sig allt de kan från kulturen av den som har besegrat dem. Ser sin egen kultur som efterbliven.

- (35:35) Vi försöker bygga en ny renässans mha utländska språk och västerländsk kultur, genom använda det i applicerade vetenskaper och science. Men detta har misslyckats. Glappet i vetenskap mellan arabvärlden och väst är fortfarande stor. 

- (36:35) En ny *nahḍa* kräver en ny generation som talar arabiska -- modersmålet i landet där de lever.

- (37:45) Jämförelsen med herbreiska i Israel. Återupplivade ett språk som idag fyller alla samhällsfunktion. I arabiska säga man att Arabiska inte är lämpat för det moderna samhället. De lyckades bygga ett samhälle och en identitet kring detta språk medan araber har misslyckats.

- (39:10) Araberna är den enda nationen i världen där man överger sitt eget språk när man lär sig ett nytt.

- (39:30) Framgångsrika länder har bevarat sitt språk. Sydkorea. Liknande utgångspunkt som arabländer. 


## Slutpoänger

Musiken blir lugnt hoppfull.

- (41:25) Den stora uppgiften den kommande tiden är att befästa vår tro (*imān*) på vårt språk, så att vi är stolta över det och glada över att tala det. Sedan gör det inget om vi pratar andra språk.

- (42:00) Att prata ockuperarens språk är att ge upp sin existens (*wujūd*) identitet (*huwuyya*) (*kaynūna*).

- (43:15) Antyder att arabiska riskerar att dö ut.

- (43:50)
> نسيان اللغة معناها نيسيان التتاريخ معناها نسيان التراث. وهذا أمر تعمل عليه الدول الأجنبية ليلا نهارا, كيف تمحوا ذاكرتنا القديمة من أجل إلحاقنا لغربها الاقتصاضي المستفل لثرواتنا ولطاقاتنا.

Detta är vad som har hänt i Irak. De stal och exporterade det kulturella och intelektuella arvet. Alla bibliotek och museum plundrades och exporterade.

- (44:50) Det är inte första gången det arabiska språket möter en sådan här utmaning. Efter den muslimska expansionen mötte den kulturellt överlägsna språk, men kom ut starkare än innan.
